The goal is to have a minimum of 8 papers in the problem space (detecting particles in accelerators using machine learning/data mining techniques). Additional papers would include problems making use of neural networks/other deep learning approaches)


Format
Paper Title
Link:

2-3 line summary.
1 line summary of results

Related work


Paper #1 - Ananya
Searching for Exotic Particles in High-energy Physics with Deep Learning
(ANN) paper.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1402.4735

The authors in this paper used deep learning methods of neural network to find exotic particles in high energy particle 
colliders. Deep learning models are neural networks with multiple hidden networks. Current technics like shallow models 
which are single hidden layer feedforward network fail to capture all features.

The deep learning model here is used on 2.6 million training examples and 100,000 validation examples. The mode is a 
five-layer neural network with 300 hidden units in each layer, learning rate of 0.05, and a weight decay coefficient 
of 0.00001 . Testing is done on 500,000 examples. For Higgs benchmark, Area Under the Curve(AUC) - complete for deep 
neural network is 0.88 and for shallow neural network = 0.81. 



Paper #2 - Ananya
Forecasting with artificial neural networks: The state of the art
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169207097000447

This paper provides an analysis of artificial neural networks in  the one of its major application area - forecasting. 
They provide a summary of current research status of ANN in forecasting and second they provide a guideline of areas for 
future research . 
It discusses different ways to construct and implement neural networks for forecasting focussing mainly on multi-layer
feed forward network. They provide a literature review of papers devoted to comparing ANNs with conventional forecasting 
approaches.



Paper #3 - Ananya
Boosted Decision Trees as an Alternative to Artificial Neural Networks for Particle Identification
http://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0408124v2.pdf

A data classification technic, boosting is introduced in this paper for data analysis by applying to decision trees. 
Boosting combines many weak classifier to achieve a final powerful classifier. It is anticipated to have wide 
application in particle physics experiments for signal and background analysis. Two boosting algorithm AdaBoost 
and e-Boost is considered here.

In the paper, ANN and AdaBoost performances are compared under different scale. Comparing the best ANN results 
and best boosting results when trained by signal and neutral current, ANN keeps 1.5 times more background events 
for 50% CCQE efficiencies. Comparison of Adaboost and e-Boost performance for background contamination vs intrinsic
CCQE selection efficiency shows that Adaboost is better for <200 tree iterations while e-Boost is better for 
larger iterations
